Restore and update Rubik's Cube example (#412)
gap-system/GapWWW: doc/example/index.md

---
title: Rubik's Cube Example
layout: default_with_title
parent: Documentation
---

This is an updated GAP 4 version of a GAP 3 example by [Martin Schönert](https://www.math.rwth-aachen.de/~Martin.Schoenert/), 1993. An almost classical permutation group of small degree is examined with some elementary GAP commands.

> The output given here has been produced by GAP 4.16.0, the input is available in form of a plain GAP 4 [input file](rubik.in).<!-- TODO -->

Reviewer: Why the TODO comment

<p style="text-align: right"><i>
Ideal Toy Company stated on the package of<br />
the original Rubik cube that there were more than<br />
three billion possible states the cube could attain.<br />
It's analogous to Mac Donald's proudly announcing<br />
that they've sold more than 120 hamburgers.</i><br />

> (J. A. Paulos, Innumeracy)</p>

Reviewer: I understand you are "backporting" this existing example, but I'd say if we do that, should also bring it to the 21st century and use CSS to format a quote like this. I.e., instead of manually inserting line breaks, and using `<p>` block, I think this should be in a `div` or maybe a `quote` and then the formatting should be CSS -- so the wrapping could presumably be achieved via `width` or `max-width` or so?

We consider the group of transformations of Rubik's magic cube. If we number the faces of this cube as follows
```
                     +--------------+
                     |  1    2    3 |
                     |  4  top    5 |
                     |  6    7    8 |
      +--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
      |  9   10   11 | 17   18   19 | 25   26   27 | 33   34   35 |
      | 12  left  13 | 20 front  21 | 28 right  29 | 36  rear  37 |
      | 14   15   16 | 22   23   24 | 30   31   32 | 38   39   40 |
      +--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
                     | 41   42   43 |
                     | 44 bottom 45 |
                     | 46   47   48 |
                     +--------------+

> ```

Reviewer: While ASCII art is fun, I wonder if we can't improve on this via some SVG or so. Ah well, not important.

then the group is generated by the following generators, corresponding to the six faces of the cube.

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```gap-repl
````

gap> cube := Group(
> ( 1, 3, 8, 6)( 2, 5, 7, 4)( 9,33,25,17)(10,34,26,18)(11,35,27,19),
> ( 9,11,16,14)(10,13,15,12)( 1,17,41,40)( 4,20,44,37)( 6,22,46,35),
> (17,19,24,22)(18,21,23,20)( 6,25,43,16)( 7,28,42,13)( 8,30,41,11),
> (25,27,32,30)(26,29,31,28)( 3,38,43,19)( 5,36,45,21)( 8,33,48,24),
> (33,35,40,38)(34,37,39,36)( 3, 9,46,32)( 2,12,47,29)( 1,14,48,27),
> (41,43,48,46)(42,45,47,44)(14,22,30,38)(15,23,31,39)(16,24,32,40) );
<permutation group with 6 generators>
```
First we want to know the size of this group.
```
gap> Size( cube );
43252003274489856000
```
Since this is a little bit unhandy, let us factorize this number.
```
gap> Collected( Factors( last ) );
[ [ 2, 27 ], [ 3, 14 ], [ 5, 3 ], [ 7, 2 ], [ 11, 1 ] ]
```
(The result tells us that the size is 2^27 3^14 5^3 7^2 11.)

> Next let us investigate the operation of the group on the 48 points (we reduce the line length to get a more appropriate output format).
> ```
> gap> SizeScreen( [71, ] );;

Reviewer: Reducing the line length here seems questionable to me -- it is very technical and distracts from the content; at the same time, clearly a line length limit was already in place above (perhaps 80) ? I think are free to format example output as we deem fit, there is no requirement to make this precisely reproducible?
````suggestion
Next let us investigate the operation of the group on the 48 points,
```
````

```
gap> cube1 := Action( cube, orbits[1] );
<permutation group with 6 generators>
gap> NrMovedPoints( cube1 );
24
gap> Size( cube1 );
88179840
```
Now this group obviously operates transitively, but let us test whether it is also primitive.
```
gap> corners := Blocks( cube1, MovedPoints( cube1 ) );
[ [ 1, 7, 22 ], [ 2, 14, 20 ], [ 3, 12, 16 ], [ 4, 17, 18 ], 
  [ 5, 9, 21 ], [ 6, 10, 24 ], [ 8, 11, 23 ], [ 13, 15, 19 ] ]
```
Those eight blocks correspond to the eight corners of the cube; on the one hand the group permutes those and on the other hand it permutes the three points at each corner cyclically.

So the obvious thing to do is to investigate the operation of the group on the eight corners. The action gives a homomorphism to a permutation group on the corners:
```
gap> blockhom1 := ActionHomomorphism( cube1, corners, OnSets );
<action homomorphism>
gap> cube1b := Image( blockhom1 );
Group([ (1,2,4,3), (1,3,6,5), (1,5,8,2), (3,4,7,6), (5,6,7,8), 
  (2,8,7,4) ])
gap> Size( cube1b );
40320
```

> Now a permutation group of degree 8 that has order 40320 must be the full symmetric group S(8) on eight points.

Reviewer: Hm, `S(8)` seems like unusual notation. How about e.g. this?
```suggestion
Now a permutation group of degree 8 that has order 40320 must be the full symmetric group $S_8$ on eight points.
```
Actually we could also show how GAP can verify this:
````suggestion
Now a permutation group of degree 8 that has order 40320 must be the full symmetric group $S_8$ on eight points.
Indeed, GAP agrees:
```gap-repl
gap> IsNaturalSymmetricGroup(cube1b);
true
```
````

The next thing then is to investigate the kernel of this operation on blocks, i.e., the subgroup of `cube1` of those elements that fix the blocks setwise.
```
gap> Factors( Size( Kernel( blockhom1 ) ) );
[ 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3 ]
gap> IsElementaryAbelian( Kernel( blockhom1 ) );
true
```

> We can show that the product of this elementary abelian group 3^7 with the S(8) is semidirect by finding a complement, i.e., a subgroup that has trivial intersection with the kernel and that generates `cube1` together with the kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can show that the product of this elementary abelian group $3^7$ with the $S_8$ is semidirect by finding a complement, i.e., a subgroup that has trivial intersection with the kernel and that generates `cube1` together with the kernel.
```

```
gap> cmpl1 := ComplementClassesRepresentatives( cube1, Kernel( blockhom1 ) );
[ <permutation group of size 40320 with 7 generators> ]
```
We verify the complement properties:
```
gap> cmpl1 := cmpl1[1];;
gap> Size( Intersection( cmpl1, Kernel( blockhom1 ) ) );
1
gap> ClosureGroup( cmpl1, Kernel( blockhom1 ) ) = cube1;
true
```
There is even a more elegant way to show that `cmpl1` is a complement.
```
gap> IsBijective( RestrictedMapping( blockhom1, cmpl1 ) );
true
```
Of course, theoretically it is clear that `cmpl1` must indeed be a complement.

> In fact we know that `cube1` is a subgroup of index 3 in the wreath product of a cyclic 3 with S(8). This missing index 3 tells us that we do not have total freedom in turning the corners. The following tests show that whenever we turn one corner clockwise we must turn another corner counterclockwise.

Reviewer: Again `S(8)`. Also maybe avoid super long lines?

```suggestion
In fact we know that `cube1` is a subgroup of index 3 in the wreath product of a cyclic 3 with $S_8$.
This missing index 3 tells us that we do not have total freedom in turning the corners.
The following tests show that whenever we turn one corner clockwise we must turn another corner counterclockwise.
```

```
gap> (1,7,22) in cube1;
false
gap> (1,7,22)(2,20,14) in cube1;
true
```
More or less the same things happen when we consider the operation of the cube group on the edges.
```
gap> cube2 := Action( cube, orbits[2] );;
gap> Size( cube2 );
980995276800
gap> edges := Blocks( cube2, MovedPoints( cube2 ) );
[ [ 1, 11 ], [ 2, 17 ], [ 3, 19 ], [ 4, 22 ], [ 5, 13 ], [ 6, 8 ], 
  [ 7, 24 ], [ 9, 18 ], [ 10, 21 ], [ 12, 15 ], [ 14, 20 ], 
  [ 16, 23 ] ]
gap> blockhom2 := ActionHomomorphism( cube2, edges, OnSets );;
gap> cube2b := Image( blockhom2 );;
gap> Size( cube2b );
479001600
gap> Factors( Size( Kernel( blockhom2 ) ) );
[ 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2 ]
gap> IsElementaryAbelian( Kernel( blockhom2 ) );
true
gap> cmpl2 := ComplementClassesRepresentatives( cube2, Kernel( blockhom2 ) );
[ <permutation group of size 479001600 with 11 generators>,
  <permutation group of size 479001600 with 11 generators>,
  <permutation group of size 479001600 with 11 generators>,
  <permutation group of size 479001600 with 11 generators> ]
```

> So there are even 4 classes of complements here. This time we get a semidirect product of a 2^11 with an S(12), namely a subgroup of index 2 of the wreath product of a cyclic 2 with S(12). Here the missing index 2 tells us again that we do not have total freedom in turning the edges. The following tests show that whenever we flip one edge we must also flip another edge.

Reviewer: math mode, `S(12)`, overlong lines

l^-1*t^-1*l*f*r*t*r^-1*f^-1*l*t*f*t^-1*f^-1*l^-1*t^2*f*t*l*t*l^-1*f^-\
1*l*t^-1*l^-1*f*t^-1*f^-1*l*t*l^-1*t*l*t^-2*l^-1*f*(t*r*t^-1*r^-1)^2*\
f^-1*t*l*f^-1*l^-1*f*l^-1*t^-1*l*t^-2*f*t*(f^-1*l^-1)^2*l^-1*f*l*e^-1\
*t*e*l*t^-1*e^-1*t^-1*e*l*b*f^-1*b^-1
gap> Length( last );
77
```
Last we let GAP choose a random element ...
```
gap> r := Random( cube );
(1,43,6,27,32,46)(2,4,13,34,10,20)(3,38,40,9,24,17)(5,15,45,23,29,47,
26,44,31,42,36,39)(7,18)(8,22)(11,33,48,14,35,30)(12,21,37,28)(16,
19)(25,41)
gap> pre := PreImagesRepresentative( hom, r );
e^-1*r*f^-1*t^-1*r*l*e*b^-1*e^-1*t^-1*b^-1*e^-1*b*l^-1*(f^-1*l)^2*t^-\
1*f*b*f^2*b^-1*t*f^-1*l*f*l*t*l^-1*t^2*l^-1*f^-1*(l*f)^2*t^-1*f^-1*l^\
-1*t^-1*l*t^2*l^-1*t*l*f^-1*l*f*l^-1*t^-1*(t^-1*l^-1)^2*e*l*e^-1*t*l*\
t^-3*l*t*f*t^-1*f^-2*l^-1*f*t*f*t^-1*f^2*l*f*l^-1*t^-1*l^-1*t*l*t*f*r\
*t*r^-1*t^-1*f^-1*t^-1*l^-1*t^-1*e^-1*t*e*l
gap> Length( last );
100
```
... and we verify that the decomposition is correct:
```
gap> Image( hom, pre );
(1,43,6,27,32,46)(2,4,13,34,10,20)(3,38,40,9,24,17)(5,15,45,23,29,47,
26,44,31,42,36,39)(7,18)(8,22)(11,33,48,14,35,30)(12,21,37,28)(16,
19)(25,41)
gap> last = r;
true
```

> This concludes our example. Of course, GAP can do much more, but demonstrating them all would take too much room.

Reviewer: "them" is grammatically incorrect, and "too much room" is a German-ism.

Some alternative suggestions:
```suggestion
This concludes our example. Of course, GAP can do much more, but demonstrating everything it can do would take too much space.
```
```suggestion
This concludes our example. Of course, GAP offers many more features, but demonstrating all of them would take too much space.
```
```suggestion
This concludes our example. Of course, GAP can do much more, but covering all of its capabilities would take too much space.
```
```suggestion
This concludes our example. Of course, GAP can do much more, but illustrating all its functionality would take too much space.
```
